Q1: How does the Constitution deal with the issue of interest groups?
A: Interest groups are protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution.

Q2: The interests of state and federal agencies are represented by ______.
A: government organizations

Q3: Peak business organizations focus on which of the following goals?
A: supporting legislation that would foster a "good business climate" in Texas

Q4: The Texas Farm Bureau represents which segment of the Texas agricultural industry?
A: large agricultural producers

Q5: The Texas Automobile Association seeks to protect and promote the interests of its member businesses that are involved in the sales of goods and services and thus is an example of a ______.
A: retail trade association

Q6: What did James Madison think of the future of interest groups?
A: He believed that competition between groups would prevent any one from dominating.

Q7: Which of the following is an example of a government organization?
A: SLIGs

Q8: Which of the following is an example of a peak business organization?
A: Texas Association of Manufacturers

Q9: What are the three types of agricultural interest groups in Texas?
A: those that represent suppliers
those that represent commodity groups
those that represent general farming interests

Q10: The Texas Apartment Association, the Texas Restaurant Association, and the Beer Alliance of Texas are all examples of ______.
A: retail trade groups

Q11: A PAC is a specialized kind of interest group that:
A: collects money for campaign contributions and other activities.

Q12: True or false: Nonmembership organizations do not have broad-based citizen support.
A: True

Q13: The Good Roads Association is an example of a(n)
because it represents the specific business interests of highway contractors.
A: trade

Q14: The Texas Farmers Union (not to be confused with the Texas Farm Bureau) represents which segment of the Texas agricultural industry?
A: family farms and ranches

Q15: What is the primary goal of retail trade associations?
A: protecting their trades from undesirable state regulation

Q16: Which of the following is an example of a specialized "educational" association?
A: Texas High School Coaches Association

Q17: Who or what can be a part of membership organizations?
A: individual citizens
businesses

Q18: Which type of interest group has little power in Texas compared to many other states?
A: labor unions

Q19: Who would be least likely to be a member of a professional association?
A: a bank teller

Q20: Which group played an important role in the civil rights movement and continues to represent African American interests today?
A: NAACP

Q21: True or false: Private sector labor unions do not exist in Texas.
A: False

Q22: In Texas, which of the following has been heavily influenced by fundamentalist Christian groups?
A: Texas State Board of Education

Q23: Public interest groups represent ______.
A: causes or ideas

Q24: True or false: To be considered an interest group, organizations must focus on economic interests.
A: False

Q25: Nonmembership organizations represent ______.
A: a single company, organization, or individual

Q26: True or false: Public employees in Texas do not have the right to bargain collectively.
A: True

Q27: Activity in Texas state politics by Hispanic Catholics is motivated by concerns about which of the following?
A: economic advancement
abortion
local services

Q28: Which of the following are examples of public interest groups?
A: National Organization for Women
American Civil Liberties Union
Mothers Against Drunk Driving

Q29: In what ways does a professional association differ from a trade association?
A: the state regulates the scope of its members' practice
its members typically hold a state-issued professional license

Q30: Approximately how many nonmembership organizations are registered with the Texas Ethics Commission?
A: 2,000

Q31: Strong antiunion feelings are a reflection of Texas's ______ political culture.
A: traditionalistic/individualistic

Q32: Which of the following is not an example of a state and local interest group?
A: State Board of Education

Q33: What is the most common technique used by interest groups to promote their interests?
A: lobbying the state legislature

Q34: Most lobbying efforts are concentrated ______.
A: every two years during the legislative session

Q35: In Texas, how are public sector employee organizations classified, due to their inability to engage in collective bargaining?
A: professional associations

Q36: Which of the following is the primary goal of most state and local interest groups?
A: protecting local interests from state activities

Q37: What is the most important reason for lobbyists to focus on the governor?
A: to influence approval or veto of pending legislation

Q38: What is the primary goal of lobbying?
A: influencing members of the legislature

Q39: What best describes lobbying activities when the legislature is not in session?
A: Lobbying efforts take place throughout the year but are especially intense during legislative sessions.

Q40: True or false: Texas is one of the 27 states that has right-to-work laws.
A: True

Q41: Which type of lobbyists are private individuals who act on their own behalf?
A: "hobbyists"

Q42: How do interest groups try to directly influence government agencies' enforcement of public policy once it has become law?
A: securing the appointments to boards and commissions of people who favor the interest group

Q43: Which of the following are considered lobbying efforts?
A: testifying before a committee hearing about the effect of proposed legislation
encouraging members of an interest group to contact legislators regarding legislation
working with members of the legislature to draft legislation

Q44: During what period would most lobbyists likely focus on building knowledge and political capital?
A: when the legislature is not in session

Q45: In its pursuit of electioneering, an interest group's most import resource is ______.
A: money

Q46: In-house lobbyists are employees of which of the following?
A: businesses or associations

Q47: What group unsuccessfully lobbied the governor of Texas in 2019 to veto a bill that sought to limit the ability of cities to regulate housing and commercial housing construction?
A: the Texas Municipal League

Q48: The practice of trying to influence members of the legislature is called
.
A: lobbying

Q49: An activity in which an interest group engages in order to influence the outcome of an election is known as
.
A: electioneering

Q50: The first step in the process of electioneering is ______.
A: candidate recruitment

Q51: How has PAC influence affected candidates' party loyalty?
A: PACs have decreased loyalty to parties since they finance races and help candidates much like parties do.

Q52: Which type of lobbyist is not paid and represents citizen groups and organizations?
A: volunteer lobbyist

Q53: How has the interest group tactic of entertaining legislators changed over the years?
A: There is far less provision of entertainment, food, and bribes, but it is still a key part of the process.

Q54: In an attempt to influence court decisions, interest groups may file "friend of the court" briefs, otherwise known as ______ briefs.
A: amicus curiae

Q55: Under lobbying regulations, what type of interest groups are required to register and file reports on their activities?
A: groups that have regular contact with legislators

Q56: Which of the following are tools used by interest groups in electioneering?
A: recruiting candidates
promising financial support for elections
staging candidate fundraisers
writing speeches

Q57: An activity in which an interest group engages in order to influence the outcome of an election is known as
.
A: electioneering

Q58: What is the chief goal of grassroots lobbying efforts by interest groups?
A: to mobilize supporters to advocate for their organization

Q59: Research suggests that when interest groups have submitted amicus briefs, they have been ______ in swaying courts.
A: quite effective

Q60: Texas first attempted to regulate interest group activities in ______, but that statute was never enforced.
A: 1907

Q61: Which of the following are prohibited by Texas law from making campaign contributions to candidates for statewide or legislative office?
A: corporations
labor unions

Q62: Which of the following accurately describe ways in which interest groups can use litigation to advance their cause?
A: They can file amicus briefs.
They can sponsor litigation on behalf of their members.

Q63: The Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission ruling ______ the role of PACs in elections.
A: greatly expanded

Q64: For which of the following interest groups would the free-rider problem be most severe?
A: a large group with very diffuse possible benefits

Q65: The Texas
is responsible for enforcing requirements for interest groups and political candidates to report information on money collected and activities.
A: Ethics or

Q66: In terms of leadership and organization, the Texas Municipal League draws strength from its ______.
A: quick adoption of stands on key legislative items
strong, proactive legislative committee

Q67: The 2010 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission did which of the following?
A: It removed the restrictions on PACs' ability to spend money on campaigns.

Q68: The Texas Municipal League, which represents Texas city officials, derives its greatest strength from ______.
A: its influential membership

Q69: The responsibility of the Texas Ethics Commission is to enforce laws relating to which of the following?
A: registration for certain interest groups
campaign finance
lobbying

Q70: Which of the following accurately describe the Texas Municipal League?
A: highly organized
focused committees
influential members

Q71: Which of the following is an example of a group that cannot draw strength from geographic distribution?
A: commercial shrimp fishermen

Q72: Interest groups need money for which of the following?
A: to pay full-time staff
public relations
electioneering
lobbying

Q73: Why is it unnecessary for the Texas Municipal League to maintain constant contact with its members?
A: Its processes are so organized that it functions efficiently without it.

Q74: , a characteristic of some interest groups, refers to the fact that the groups have members in all regions of the state.
A: Geographic

Q75: An "astroturf organization" is one that lacks ______.
A: a grassroots organization

Q76: Which of the following industries have, in the past, dominated the Texas economy?
A: cattle
banking
cotton
oil

Q77: How does the party structure in Texas affect interest group power and influence?
A: The weakened structure of party competitiveness strengthens interest group influence.

Q78: What is the primary reason that geographic distribution positively affects the power of interest groups?
A: It allows groups to command the interest of more legislators.

Q79: What organization provides legislative staff assistance in research and information?
A: the Texas Legislative Council

Q80: Which statement best describes economic activity in Texas?
A: The Texas economy is highly diversified, with a strong presence in several industries.

Q81: States with ______ political parties tend to have weaker interest group influence.
A: strong

Q82: Why does the Texas oil industry lobby focus on influencing the Texas Railroad Commission?
A: The Texas Railroad Commission oversees the state oil industry.

Q83: , a characteristic of some interest groups, refers to the fact that the groups have members in all regions of the state.
A: Geographic

Q84: How does a well-compensated, professional legislative staff reduce the influence of interest groups?
A: The staff provides most of the research for legislators, who rely less on interest group research.

Q85: How does economic diversity affect interest group power in Texas?
A: The diversified economy has increased the number of interest groups, thus diluting the groups' power.

Q86: Texas has a(n)
government structure because power is dispersed to many state agencies with little or no central control.
A: fragmented

Q87: When individuals or groups try to secure benefits for themselves through political means, the process is called ______.
A: rent seeking

Q88: Which of the following is true of the professionalism of the Texas legislature?
A: Poor working conditions and low pay contribute to high turnover among legislative staff.

Q89: How common is capture?
A: It is more the exception than the rule.

Q90: How does the state's government structure alter the operations of interest groups in Texas?
A: The groups focus their attention on the leadership of the state agency regulating their industry.

Q91: State licensing boards spend most of their time ______.
A: limiting the number of people that can be licensed
creating favorable rules for members of their profession

Q92: Which of the following entities is not involved in an "Iron Triangle"?
A: a corporation

Q93: Which of the following make it likely that interest groups will continue to dominate state politics in Texas?
A: the traditionalistic/individualistic political culture
the decentralized administrative structure
low levels of political participation

Q94: The term "capture" refers to the situation in which an interest group forms a very close relationship with ______.
A: a state agency

Q95: Texas has a(n)
government structure because power is dispersed to many state agencies with little or no central control.
A: fragmented

Q96: How common is the iron triangle process?
A: It is very common.

Q97: In some campaigns, which of the following has begun to replace in the political party as the nominating and electing agent?
A: PACs

Q98: When a state agency becomes controlled by its constituency interest group, it is referred to as
.
A: capture

Q99: The process in which interest groups, the state agency, and the legislative committee create policy is known as the
.
A: Iron

Q100: Which of the following constitutional rights most protect the role of interest groups in the U.S. political system?
A: freedom of association

